Western Mediterranean
Situation in 2024
This route leads from the North-West of Africa to the south of Spain.
In 2024 it saw an almost unchanged level of illegal border crossings, owing to an increase in
departures from Algeria offsetting lower numbers from Morocco. Nationals of Algeria,
Morocco and Mali accounted for majority of all detections.
The use of powerful speedboats to transport migrants was just like in a previous year a
frequent occurrence in 2024.
Situation in 2023
This route leads from the North-West of Africa to the south of Spain. It saw an increase of
around 12% in relation to 2022, with Moroccans and Algerians by far the largest migrant
groups detected. The use of powerful speedboats to transport migrants was a frequent
occurrence in 2023.
Migrants 	frequently 	report 	that 	smugglers 	are 	armed, 	especially 	along 	the 	Western
Mediterranean and the Western Balkan routes. The greatest number of reported violence
among irregular migrants also occurs on these two routes.
Situation in 2022
The Western Mediterranean route saw a decrease in migratory pressure in 2022 with around
a fifth fewer detections than in the previous year. While 80 % of the irregular migrants come
from Northwest African countries, selected Sub-Saharan African nationalities recorded major
increases, as did Syrians.
Situation in 2021
The number of arrivals to Europe via the Western Mediterranean route increased slightly in
2021 as 18 466 cases were reported.
Algeria was the main country of departure. The majority of the migrants detected on this route
were of Algerian nationality, while Moroccans continued to account for the second most
detected nationality.
Situation in 2020
In 2020, 17 228 irregular migrants were detected on this route, representing a decrease of 28%
from 2019.
The decline in the number of people choosing this path to Europe can be attributed to the
COVID-19 countermeasures introduced throughout Northwest Africa, and particularly the
restrictions in place in Morocco diverted migration flows onto the Western African route.

-- 1 of 3 --

Most of the migratory pressure on the Western Mediterranean route was associated with
Algerian nationals who accounted for two thirds of all detections. Departures from Algeria
almost tripled when compared with 2019 and occurred in significant numbers much earlier in
the year than in previous years.
Moroccans were the second most common nationality on this route.
Situation in 2019
In 2019, this route was the second most used path to Europe. The total number of detections
was 23 969, more than half less than the record numbers of 2018.
Moroccan and Algerian migrants accounted for almost half of the people taking this route,
while the nationality of the remaining half remained unspecified.
Departures from Morocco decreased significantly after January 2019 but started to somewhat
pick up from the summer onwards again. Departures from Algeria remained almost
unchanged.
There was an increase in cases involving jet skis and speedboats, traditionally used for drug
trafficking, for people smuggling on this route.
Situation in 2018
In 2018, the Western Mediterranean became the most frequently used route into Europe. The
number of detections in 2018 doubled for the second consecutive year to a record high of 56
245.
Morocco was the main departure point to Europe for irregular migrants. Most of the migratory
pressure registered on this route was linked to migrants originating from sub-Saharan
countries. However, towards the end of 2018, the number of Moroccan migrants began to
increase.
Migrants claiming to be minors accounted for 9% of the arrivals on this route. Overall, on both
land and sea routes, Moroccans were the top detected nationality, followed by Guineans,
Malians and Algerians.
Situation in 2017 and before
In 2017, the number of migrants detected reaching Spain from northern Africa jumped to 23
063.
The situation in the Rif region of Morocco, the main transit country for migrants heading to
Spain, created an opportunity for more departures from its western coast in the second half
of the year.
Two of every five migrants were nationals of Algeria and Morocco. Most of the remaining
people on this route came from Western Africa.

-- 2 of 3 --

In 2016, detections of illegal border crossings on the Western Mediterranean route reached
almost 10 000. As in the case of the Central Mediterranean route, most migrants were from
Africa.
Nevertheless, the situation differed considerably at the land and sea border. At the land
borders of Ceuta and Melilla, yearly detections near the fences hit a record low of about 1 000,
while detections at the sea border increased to over 8 000 in 2016.

-- 3 of 3 --

